
- 1-star

** spoiler alert ** Having read it once when I was very young, and having retained nearly nothing of it, I dredged this book up from the annals of my childhood. If I'd been expecting rediscovery it would've been a sore disappointment, but I really can't say; having now been through the book again, I found the experience relatively bland. The reader follows a fastidious English gentleman by the name of Phileas Fogg who is, apparently, the human incarnation of impassivity. Our protagonist also happens to be wealthy, eccentric, extraordinarily patient, altruistic, and seemingly invulnerable (he emerges suspiciously unscathed throughout all of his many misadventures).

Fogg acquires a new manservant, a self-flagellating Frenchman by the name of Passepartout, before setting out to circumnavigate the globe on an outrageous wager of ~$2,000,000. Despite having been seeking a quiet, orderly existence when Fogg whisks him away, Passepartout becomes quickly enamored with his new master and falls into an endless pattern of incredulous adoration, punctuated only by occasional spats of self-recrimination. Together they encounter Aouda, a damsel in distress, for whom Fogg immediately derails his plans with nary a concern for his own welfare. It is actually Passepartout who saves Aouda (Fogg turns out to be nearly useless except as a moral compass, without whom everybody else would be hopelessly lost in discerning right from wrong), but - having subsequently joined their party - in her gratitude she falls head over heels in love with Phileas Fogg, who betrays no outward indication of returning her affections.

The group is pursued by a detective Fix, who we learn has identified Phileas Fogg as the culprit in a recent bank robbery of some ~$5,000,000. Shenanigans ensue and the detective is somehow absorbed into Phileas Fogg's party, where he assumes his role as the story's butt-monkey, against whom fate itself seems to be conspiring. Despite Fogg's irreproachable behavior during their journey, Fix remains stubbornly convinced that he's got the right man and, after pursuing him all the way around the globe, finally arrests Fogg upon their landing back in London. This act becomes the final nail in the coffin as it delays Fogg's return to the pre-arranged location where he can settle his wager.

Unfortunately for Fix, it turns out he was mistaken all along. Fogg is released from jail, smacks Fix upside the head and tries to make up for lost time but cannot - he arrives five minutes too late. He handles this devastating loss in his typically phlegmatic fashion. Aouda, who has been with them throughout, now asks whether Fogg will accept her as his wife. He does, and sends Passepartout to make arrangements, but - Sacre Bleu! - he notices that, by traveling Eastward around the world, they have gained a day, and magically a happy ending emerges from the ashes.

This book betrays its age, as it is unapologetically and painfully ethnocentric. As a reader who is not usually troubled by such things, I found myself cringing at the narrator's narrow descriptions of the various cultures that Fogg & Co. are passing through. Indians are savages, and the English are civilizing the world, etc. Honestly, this wouldn't have bothered me if the author had at least written likeable characters, but - with the exception of Phileas Fogg, who is more of a personified force of nature than a character - they feel more like cardboard cutouts than characters, arranged in such a way as to persuade the reader that Phileas Fogg ought to be regarded as the quintessential hero figure.

This is made much more painful by the realization that Fogg does little throughout the story to earn the affection of his companions. Passepartout, on the other hand, is the true hero of the story; his bravery, unswerving loyalty and ingenuity propel the plot forward on more than one occasion. It is through Passepartout's perspective that we are sold a pure and unblemished version of Fogg and Aouda, and his inference that the two are made for each other. Outside of an occasional display of emotional fortitude, Aouda is the quintessential female object; prim, pretty and easily dismayed whenever Fogg or his mission are jeopardized.

Had there been any opportunity whatsoever afforded to the reader for relating to him, Phileas Fogg might've been a likeable character. Unfortunately, we are never going to know Phileas Fogg's internal struggles, because what we see (through Passepartout's eyes) is a perfectly decisive machine of a man, unswerving, unshakable, indefatigable; boring and cliché.