
- 2-stars

It's not very good, but it's not exceedingly painful either. I'm reading the series as a matter of familiarizing myself with pop-culture fantasy fiction, and otherwise I wouldn't have finished. If you're a world-weary bookworm, reading purely for pleasure, look elsewhere.

The parallels to Lord of the Rings are suspiciously strong, but that's not necessarily damning on its own. Add to that the barely passable prose and things begin to look bleak. So what's saving this book from a one-star rating? Well, the setting isn't awful.

Actually, the world is rather interesting. If you're willing to overlook pretty much everything that makes a story worth reading, there's actually a lot going on behind the scenes. Mostly it suffers from the commonest disease of mediocre fiction: The entire rest of the book is an excuse for the author to deliver The Plot.

Considering it's obviously his baby, it's unsurprising that -- in all honesty -- the plot ain't bad. When I say there's a lot going on, I mean it. Ancient, god-like figures vying for power, warring cultures, cursed artifacts, forgotten magic and fantastical creatures. You name it; this series probably has it. What's happening in the world at large feels important and captivating, but it's unfortunately detached from what we're dealing with on ground level.

And dear sweet Jesus are things bad down here at the character perspective level. It would be one thing if we were dealing with simple cliché, because there's nothing wrong with a plain old-fashioned burger done proper justice. Almost every interaction comes across as obnoxiously contrived, and I have to make it clear that I'm not talking here about the sort of coincidence that drives stories, I am talking about characters being bound, gagged and paraded around by the author in service of the narrative.

Early on we're handed a protagonist triad, three strapping young lads from Emond's Field: Rand, Mat and Perrin. Each of them was born within a year of the others and, throughout the first book, we're led to believe that any one of them could be the reincarnation of the Dark One's nemesis. This is the forgivable sort of coincidence I mentioned earlier, it's the stuff epic stories are made of. As I've mentioned, from a bird's eye view all of this checks out. It's when you zoom-in things start falling apart...

Rand al'Thor, a character who would otherwise read as gullible, suffers from sudden episodes of reticence -- becoming uncharacteristically tight-lipped -- whenever a confidant might threaten inconvenience for the plot. We're told that he's stubborn, but none of his defiance ever amounts to anything; it feels worse than token, since we're subjected to his tantrums with zero payoff. As one of the ta'veren, his decisions might have significantly more impact on the Web of Destiny, so it's anticlimactic that he never seems to make any. Rand is a leaf, blown about by the winds of circumstance; flimsy and unsubstantial. Aside from being exceptionally tall and thereby -- presumably, he doesn't have any other qualities -- attracting anything sufficiently estrogenic, he's utterly unremarkable.

Perrin, in contrast to Rand, ought to be the strong, silent type. That's how the author is billing him, at least. And, whenever it's convenient for the story, he's given license to act in accordance with his billing. Occasionally (i.e. whenever a clever, thoughtful protagonist might somehow think their way out of a bind) he suffers from uncharacteristic thoughtlessness and panic, or just -- y'know -- goes completely berserk. As the plot thickens, Perrin discovers that there are primal powers awakening in him, to which he responds by promptly plugging his ears, squeezing his eyes shut and pretending that it isn't happening.

Matrin Cauthon is easily the least-likable of the three. He's sold to the reader as a good-natured troublemaker -- a little juvenile at times, but otherwise reliable. Except that he's not. In reality, Mat is endlessly self-absorbed, indolent, petulant and cynical; his only redeeming moment, during which he takes care of Rand -- who has fallen suddenly ill -- could easily be construed as an act of desperation, rather than loyalty. This isn't an example of that one character we all love to hate; the conflict that should naturally emerge from his asinine behavior is either absent or never consummated. His presence is a constant irritation for both the reader and also the rest of the cast who, for no apparent reason, carry on putting up with his bullshit. There is no payoff: Matrin Cauthon exists purely for the sake of a few contrived moments when the plot calls for a misstep so unutterably stupid that to use any other character would be equivalent to asking the reader to believe that somebody had swallowed the sun.

None of the other characters is any better. Nynaeve, the fiercely independent Wisdom of Emond's Field, is presented to the reader as exceedingly disciplined and practical. That is, when she's not too busy mooning over the brooding, Byronic charms of the warder, Lan, or throwing a churlish tantrum over another lost argument with Moiraine Aes Sedai. Lan himself is only aloof when it's convenient for the story, and falls more-or-less immediately in love with the young, skillful and very pretty Wisdom. Meanwhile, Moiraine is made to look clever at everyone else's expense. You've probably gathered that I am not given to think that any of these characters is particularly bright, but Moiraine Sedai seems to rob characters of their common sense and render otherwise functional characters spontaneously incapable of performing even basic tasks unaided.

I'll say it again, none of the other characters is any better. It's not that there aren't any satisfying moments, it's just that they're all undermined by moments of conspicuous inconsistency. For example, despite each of them seeming capable of independent thought, none of the Emond's Field folk seem capable of overcoming their superstitious distrust of Aes Sedai, or even making any progress in that direction, to be honest. Only Egwene, who seems to idolize Moiraine, is an exception to this rule, making matters worse by inviting the reader to surmise that the cultural brainwashing isn't really insurmountable after all. This is only remarkable to the extent that, despite every piece of evidence to the contrary, despite owing their lives to her many times over, most of the main cast persist in regarding Moiraine Sedai as something just short of an outright villain.

Despite all the nonsense, I maintained a vague sense of optimism throughout the book. Mostly because the characters themselves aren't poorly written per say -- these aren't your typical one-dimensional characters. Instead, they feel like reasonably well-developed characters who are constantly throwing errors whenever the plot demands that they malfunction. In many ways, this makes it feel even worse. Eye of the World doesn't suffer from bad writing or a lack of imagination -- it suffers from poor storytelling. The author is constantly, brazenly violating their characters' autonomy for the sake of preserving the greater narrative through line, which clashes violently with the perspective choice.

What I'm trying to say is this: The choice to subordinate your characters to some grand narrative vision is valid, but when it's done properly those stories read like A Wizard of Earthsea or the Silmarillion. If that's what the author wanted, why does this book read like Harry Potter?