---
---
I want to talk about a particular state of mind, one that is unnervingly close to boredom. See, I have long stood proud of the fact that I am not easily bored, and asserted glibly that ‘if you’re bored then you’re boring’, but now I may have to eat my words, at least in some sense. The state of mind that I am talking about isn’t Flow, the oft-referenced but commonly misunderstood state of an expert lost in their craft, nor is it the Open Mode referenced by John Cleese in his famous TED talk.

Shower Thoughts is written explicitly in the title but if you’ve ever found yourself suddenly struck by inspiration while taking a dump, it’s the same feeling. You’re stuck sitting through some torturous lecture for a mandatory credit course when, all of a sudden, the creative centers of your brain light up like a Christmas tree; you’re out for a jog, or taking a stroll; you’re washing the dishes, vacuuming or alphabetizing the spice rack… What is going on here?

What do all of these situations have in common? It seems obvious: They’re mundane tasks that occupy (or detain) us physically, but leave our minds free to wander. To the habitual optimizer, this seems like a great opportunity. The elementary mistake (that I’ve made) is to observe these facts and conclude that, by manufacturing similar circumstances, perhaps I can unlock the infinite potential of my latent creative genius. Wouldn’t that be nice? Unfortunately, in my experience, this turns out to be a lot like trying to force yourself to sleep through sheer willpower.

Furthermore, there seems to be something of an inverse correlation between how convenient it would be to capitalize on an unanticipated burst of creativity and whether the proverbial muse comes knocking. Go ahead and raise your hand if you’ve ever brought a notepad with you into the shower, intending to brainstorm, and come out with nothing but pruney fingers to show for it. You go out hunting for inspiration and she laughs in your face, that’s just how it works; trying to sneak up on your creative genius seems to backfire every time.

Except that’s not entirely true. Exactly how to evoke such a state of mind has been the subject of many books, some better than others. One of the more famous – and less impressive – examples is Deep Work, an aptly categorized Self-Help book, written by ‘American nonfiction author and associate professor of Computer Science at Georgetown University’ Cal Newport. Don’t waste your time, let me summarize it for you like this: It is absolutely possible to coerce your latent genius into cooperating with you, given unlimited time and the discipline required to weaponize it against yourself. Let me explain.

See, when we initially deduced that boredom was magically activating our latent creative genius, we weren’t wrong. The problem was thinking we could somehow trick ourselves into feeling bored. And with that you’ve already guessed the horrifying truth: we will always see through our own bullshit; boredom really works, but only Real Boredom really works.

One of the most prolific creative periods of my life was when I sequestered myself roughly 1,600 miles away from everyone and everything I knew in a tiny one-bedroom condominium. There, in a state of self-imposed total isolation – free from any possible distraction – I managed the sort of manic workload so often glorified in modern society.

Here’s an obvious if somewhat vulgar analogy: Entreating the muse is like courting a particularly aloof lover who, due to some unfortunate aspect of human psychology – or poor socialization –  is repelled by your fascination with them. The approach prescribed by Deep Work, the same one that I described in the last paragraph, is equivalent to clubbing them over the head to get what you want.

Aside from being morally aversive, most people intuitively understand that it’s not a great strategy. At least where courtship is concerned, it’s exclusively reserved for psychopaths who are unwelcome in civilized society. Meanwhile, the opposite is true for creativity: We exalt the ascetic genius who holds themselves apart to pursue their work, and – since this sort of isolated existence simply isn’t realistic for most people – we tend to assume that such thought work is the sacred domain of a privileged few.

The sobering reality is that building sustainable creative habits is a lot of work. The mind recoils from boredom and retreats inward to where your imagination lives, but trying to trick yourself into feeling bored is like brandishing a baseball bat at yourself in the mirror hoping to scare yourself into cooperating. Locking yourself in a featureless room for a few hours until you’re actually bored is like making good on the threat. Congratulations, you’ve beaten yourself into submission. Unfortunately, it seems like you’re going to have to do that every time you want to see results.

Given that very few people have a sensory deprivation tank and several hours a day set aside for boring themselves to tears, this option is about as realistic as becoming a recluse. But not every prolific creative genius who lived was a solitary pariah, so what gives?